---
title: "NDCG-Consistent Softmax Approximation with Accelerated Convergence."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-06-13-paper-title-ndcg
excerpt: 'Ranking tasks constitute fundamental components of extreme similarity learning frameworks, where extremely large corpora of objects are modeled through relative similarity relationships adhering to predefined ordinal structures. Among various ranking surrogates, Softmax (SM) Loss has been widely adopted due to its natural capability to handle listwise ranking via global negative comparisons, along with its flexibility across diverse application scenarios. However, despite its effectiveness, SM Loss often suffers from significant computational overhead and scalability limitations when applied to large-scale object spaces. To address this challenge, we propose novel loss formulations that align directly with ranking metrics: the Ranking-Generalizable \textbf{squared} (RG) Loss and the Ranking-Generalizable interactive (RG) Loss, both derived through Taylor expansions of the SM Loss. Notably, RG reveals the intrinsic mechanisms underlying weighted squared losses (WSL) in ranking methods and uncovers fundamental connections between sampling-based and non-sampling-based loss paradigms. Furthermore, we integrate the proposed RG losses with the highly efficient Alternating Least Squares (ALS) optimization method, providing both generalization guarantees and convergence rate analyses. Empirical evaluations on real-world datasets demonstrate that our approach achieves comparable or superior ranking performance relative to SM Loss, while significantly accelerating convergence. This framework offers the similarity learning community both theoretical insights and practically efficient tools, with methodologies applicable to a broad range of tasks where balancing ranking quality and computational efficiency is essential.'
date: 2025-06-13
venue: 'arXiv preprint'
citation: 'Yuanhao Pu, Defu Lian\*, Xiaolong Chen, Xu Huang, Jin Chen, Enhong Chen. NDCG-Consistent Softmax Approximation with Accelerated Convergence. arXiv preprint:2506.09454, 2025.'
---

The Embarrassingly Shallow Autoencoders (EASE and SLIM) are strong recommendation methods based on implicit feedback, compared to competing methods like iALS and VAE-CF. However, EASE suffers from several major shortcomings. First, the training and inference of EASE can not scale with the increasing number of items since it requires storing and inverting a large dense matrix; Second, though its optimization objective – the square loss– can yield a closed-form solution, it is not consistent with recommendation goal – predicting a personalized ranking on a set of items, so that its performance is far from optimal w.r.t ranking-oriented recommendation metrics. Finally, the regularization coefficients are sensitive w.r.t recommendation accuracy and vary a lot across different datasets, so the fine-tuning of these parameters is important yet time-consuming. To improve training and inference efficiency, we propose a Similarity-Structure Aware Shallow Autoencoder on top of three similarity structures, including Co-Occurrence, KNN and NSW. We then optimize the model with a weighted square loss, which is proven effective for ranking-based recommendation but still capable of deriving closed-form solutions. However, the weight in the loss can not be learned in the training set and is similarly sensitive w.r.t the accuracy to regularization coefficients. To automatically tune the hyperparameters, we design two validation losses on the validation set for guidance, and update the hyperparameters with the gradient of the validation losses. We finally evaluate the proposed method on multiple real-world datasets and show that it outperforms seven competing baselines remarkably, and verify the effectiveness of each part in the proposed method. [source](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3543507.3583349)
